- Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast
where we discuss science
and science-based tools
for everyday life.
[bright guitar music]
I'm Andrew Huberman and I'm
a professor of neurobiology
and ophthalmology at
Stanford School of Medicine.
Today we are talking
about time perception.
Our perception of time is
perhaps the most important factor
in how we gauge our life,
that is whether or not we
think we are being successful,
whether or not we are failing,
whether or not we live in fear,
whether or not we live
in relation to things
in a way that's positive,
and the reason for that
is that our perception of
time is directly linked
to the neurochemical
states that control mood,
stress, happiness, excitement,
and of course it frames the way
in which we evaluate our past,
so whether or not we think of our past
as successful or unsuccessful.
It frames our present,
whether or not we think we
are on track or off track.
And it frames our sense of the future,
whether or not we think
we have a bright future,
a dim future,
or whether or not the future
is very uncertain or not.
Today, we're going to
talk about the science
of time perception and we
are going to talk about tools
and protocols that you can use
that can enhance your ability
to dilate and contract time.
What do we mean by
dilate and contract time?
We can control the speed at
which we experience life.
We can slow things down
or we can speed our experience of life up.
And we can do that in a
very direct and dynamic way.
It's actually not that hard
once you understand how
time perception works.
So that's where we're headed.
I think you're going to come
away from today's episode
with a lot of new knowledge
and certainly with many tools
that you can try in your daily life,
whether or not that's work, sport,
relational, emotional, and so on.
Before we begin our discussion
about time perception,
I'd like to answer some
questions that I received
related to the episode on fasting
and time-restricted feeding.
If you haven't seen that episode,
this information should
still be of use to you.
Time-restricted feeding involves eating
for a particular period of time
in each 24-hour cycle
that's fairly regular.
So this would be an eight-hour most often
or a 10-hour block.
Some people do shorter feeding
windows, but regardless,
that feeding window is supposed to fall
at more or less the same
period within each 24-hour day.
This has a number of positive
effects on gene expression
that regulate a number of positive effects
on the different tissues of
the body, and for some people,
not all, but for some people
makes weight loss easier
because of the way that
they are not eating
for large periods of each 24-hour cycle.
In any event, one of the
major questions I got
after that episode was do
supplements break a fast?
And during that episode,
I talked about what breaks
a fast is highly contextual.
It basically boils down
to whether or not something you ingest,
whether it be liquid or food,
increases your resting blood glucose,
how much it increases that
resting blood glucose,
and how long that increase lasts.
So you can check out the episode
for more about what breaks a fast,
but to address this
issue about supplements
and whether or not supplements
in particular break a fast,
many of the questions were
about Athletic Greens.
Athletic Greens is a
sponsor of this podcast.
It is also a terrific
supplement that I'd been taking
for more than a decade
before this podcast launched.
And many people have been using
and continue to use Athletic Greens.
Does Athletic Greens break a fast?
Well, that will somewhat depend
on whether or not your
resting blood glucose
tends to run high or
low, but for most people,
including me, because I've measured it,
ingesting Athletic Greens
does not break a fast
and if it happens to break a fast,
it would be a very
transient break in fast.
So without knowing your
resting blood glucose levels
on an individual basis, there's
no way I can say for sure
that it doesn't break a fast,
but chances are it does not
because it doesn't contain
much carbohydrate or sugar
and it doesn't tend to therefore pull you
out of the molecular mill you associated
with low blood glucose states.
The other question I get
is whether or not things
like fish oil break a
fast, and once again,
this will be contextual,
but because fish oil is
a fat, an essential fat,
mainly essential fatty acids,
in particular EPA and DHA,
those don't tend to raise
blood glucose very much.
In my case, having measured
using a continuous glucose
monitor my resting blood glucose,
fish oil does not in any way change
my resting blood glucose.
Chances are it won't do that
for most people as well.
So does fish oil break a
fast? Chances are it does not.
And of course people wanted to know
about pill-type supplements, you know,
caffeine and things that raise dopamine
and their vitamins and minerals.
In general, if something
doesn't contain sugar
or much carbohydrate of any kind,
it's not going to raise
blood glucose very much.
Now, of course, protein
can raise blood glucose
and fat can too as well,
although to a lesser extent.
So again, this is all contextual,
but at least by the logic
that I just spelled out,
Athletic Greens, fish oil,
and most forms of supplements,
provided they don't have any
sugar or protein content,
should not quote unquote break a fast.
Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize
that this podcast is
separate from my teaching
and research roles at Stanford.
It is however part of my desire and effort
to bring zero cost to consumer
information about science
and science-related tools
to the general public.
In keeping with that theme,
I'd like to thank the
sponsors of today's podcast.
Our first sponsor is ROKA.
ROKA makes eyeglasses and sunglasses
that are of the absolute highest quality.
I've spent a lifetime
working on the visual system
and one of the key things
about our visual system
is that it's designed so
that when you move into areas
where it's sunny or
where there are shadows,
you can still see things
with crystal clarity.
Many sunglasses out there have the problem
that you have to keep taking them off
and putting them back on
depending on the overall
so-called ambient environment
that you're in.
ROKA sunglasses have solved this problem
and their eyeglasses
also have super clarity
regardless of overall
ambient lighting, as we say.
In other words, you see
everything very clearly
no matter where you are.
They also come in a number
of different styles.
The aesthetics are really terrific.
So unlike a lot of
performance glasses out there
that make people look like cyborgs,
you can wear them anywhere.
You can wear them to dinner.
You can wear them to school or work
or in social engagements and
you can wear them running
and cycling and out doing
your various activities.
If you'd like to try ROKA glasses,
you can go to ROKA that's R-O-K-A, .com
and enter the code Huberman
to save 20% off your first order.
Today's episode is also brought
to us by Athletic Greens.
Athletic Greens is an all-in-one
vitamin mineral probiotic drink.
I started using Athletic
Greens way back in 2012
and so I'm delighted that
they're sponsoring the podcast.
The reason that I started
using Athletic Greens
and the reason I still
take Athletic Greens
once or twice every day is that it covers
all of my foundational needs for vitamins,
minerals, and probiotics.
In fact, when people ask me
what supplements they should take,
if I were going to recommend
just one supplement,
it would be Athletic Greens
because of the enormous number
of biological factors that
it impacts in a positive way.
It has, as I mentioned,
vitamins and minerals.
The probiotics are really
important for the gut microbiome
and gut health which is
important for the immune system
and for brain health and for mood
and a number of other important factors
including hormones and so on.
If you'd like to try Athletic Greens,
you can go to athleticgreens.com/huberman
to claim their special offer.
They'll give you five free travel packs
which make it really easy
to mix up Athletic Greens
while you're on the road or in the car.
And they'll give you a year's
supply of vitamin D3 K2.
Vitamin D3 and K2 have been
shown to be really important
for a number of important
aspects of your immediate
and long-term health
including blood lipid profiles
and a number of other things.
Again, go to athleticgreens.com/huberman
to get the Athletic Greens,
the five free travel packs,
and the year's supply of vitamin D3 K2.
Today's podcast is also
brought to us by InsideTracker.
InsideTracker is a
personalized nutrition platform
that analyzes data from your blood and DNA
to help you better understand your body
and help you reach your health goals.
I've long been a believer in
getting regular blood work done
for the simple reason
that many of the factors
that impact your immediate
and long-term health
can only be analyzed
from a quality blood test
and it's for that reason
that I get my blood work done
once every four to six months.
Might seem like a lot,
but it has been vital
in order to keep my health where I want it
and to ensure that my
health trajectory is heading
in the direction that I'd like it to go
with each passing year.
The other thing about InsideTracker
is they have DNA tests
which can tell you about the
specific makeup of your genes
that can impact your particular nutrition,
lifestyle, and supplementation regimes.
They can also help you
steer your immediate
and long-term health in the
direction that you want to go.
They make the whole thing very, very easy.
You can have the blood test taken at home
or you can go to a local clinic.
Then the results come back
and the wonderful thing is
the platform, the dashboard that they use
walks you through your data
and points to specific
things related to nutrition.
Maybe you should be eating
more of certain things,
eating less of others, supplementing
in certain ways or not.
And lifestyle factors like exercise
in order to bring the
numbers into the ranges
that are right for your
immediate and long-term health.
If you'd like to try InsideTracker,
you can visit insidetracker.com/huberman
to get 25% off any of
InsideTracker's plans.
Just use the code Huberman at checkout.
So let's talk about time perception
and the most fundamental
aspect of time perception
is something called entrainment.
Entrainment is the way in
which your internal processes,
your biology and your psychology,
are linked to some external thing.
And the most basic form of entrainment
that we are all a slave to all year round
for our entire life are
so-called circannual rhythms.
We have neurons, nerve cells
in our eye, in our brain,
and in our body that are
marking off the passage of time
throughout the year,
literally a calendar system
in your brain and body.
And the way this works
is beautifully simple.
Light seen by your eyes
inhibits, meaning it reduces,
the amount of a hormone released
in your brain called melatonin.
Melatonin has two major functions.
One function is to make
you sleepy at night
and the other is to regulate
some of the other hormones
of the body, in particular
testosterone and estrogen.
When we view light,
we reduce the amount
of melatonin released.
In fact, if you wake up in
the middle of the night,
when melatonin typically is
pretty high in your brain
and body and you flip on a
bright light in the bathroom,
your melatonin levels crash down
to almost zero and stay there.
Light is a very powerful
modulator of melatonin
and light inhibits melatonin.
Throughout the year,
depending on where you live,
day length varies, and as a consequence,
the amount of light from the sun
that is available to you varies.
So when days are long,
the amount of melatonin
in your brain and body that's
released tends to be less.
There's less of it and it's released
for shorter amounts of time, okay?
Because light inhibits melatonin.
When days are very short,
the amount of melatonin
that's released and the duration
that that melatonin exists
in your brain and body
tends to be much longer.
So melatonin correlates with day length.
And if we are viewing more
light, we have less melatonin.
We view less light, we
have more melatonin.
You see different
amounts of light each day
but we have a process
in our brain and body
that averages the amount
of light that you're seeing
both from artificial
sources and from sunlight
and measures that off, and
it's so exquisitely precise
that for a given, say,
eight-hour day in the spring,
'cause spring in the Northern
Hemisphere or elsewhere,
you know, days are getting longer,
that means that the amount of melatonin
is getting progressively less and less
and that signal is
conveyed to all the systems
of your brain and body.
And this is why most people, not all,
but most people feel like
they have more energy
in the spring.
Conversely, when you
have an eight-hour day
in the winter, the amount of melatonin
that corresponds to that eight-hour day
is getting progressively
greater and greater because why?
Days are getting shorter
so melatonin is increasing
from day to day to day.
Every cell and system of your
body pays attention to this,
and as a consequence,
most people, not all,
but most people feel
they have a little less
or sometimes a lot less energy
and a slightly lower mood
in the winter months.
Now, there are exceptions
to this, of course,
but the melatonin signal is the way
in which your internal state, your mood,
your sense of energy, even
your appetite is entrained,
is matched to some external event.
In this case, the event is the rotation
of the Earth around the sun.
There are other forms of entrainment,
meaning the matching
of your brain and body
to things that are happening
in your external environment.
One particularly
interesting example of this
was published last year by
Parikh et al. in "Cell Reports,"
Cell Press journal, excellent journal,
showing that across the calendar year,
the amount of testosterone and estrogen
that human beings make varies
such that in longer days,
they tend to make more
testosterone and estrogen
than in shorter days.
And this was correlated
with things like desire
to seek out romantic partners
or have romantic interactions
with their existing
partners, even aggression,
although not violent aggression,
but sense of kind of willingness to argue
and to get into kind of combative states
and overall energy and mood.
This is something that had been
hypothesized for a long time
but it had never really
been cleanly demonstrated.
And what they showed was
that it's actually the skin
that's taking information
about the amount of light
and converting it into these increases
in testosterone and estrogen.
Light exposure to the skin,
turns out about two hours a day,
this was sunlight, in this
case, to the upper body,
these people weren't naked,
they were wearing clothes
but their arms were exposed,
their upper back and neck
and face were exposed,
they were not wearing hats,
resulted in large increases,
significant increases in
testosterone and estrogen.
Now you could probably export
a tool from that if you liked.
That's not really what
this podcast is about
but it's very clear that
because the skin is acting
as an endocrine orman, organ, excuse me,
as kind of a hormone-influencing organ,
that getting light on the
skin, not just to the eyes,
can influence our sense of wellbeing
by these hormone pathways,
and the threshold there again
seemed to be about two hours a day.
It doesn't have to be very bright outside.
There can be cloud cover and so on.
Many people will probably ask
will sunscreen inhibit this effect?
And it doesn't appear that it does.
Obviously prioritize skin
health and avoiding skin cancer.
Sunscreen is kind of a
controversial topic nowadays,
maybe the topic for another
podcast episode at some point,
but nonetheless, what the
Parikh et al. study shows
and that's most relevant
to today's podcast
is that we are entrained, we are matched
to the external light-dark cycle
and as the day length
changes, our hormones change.
And we can override that with
exposure to bright lights.
You know, people go sit on tanning beds.
That's not a practice I
particularly myself engage in,
but, you know, there are
a number of different ways
that people can override these processes.
But the point is very simple.
The point is that our perception
of time is both conscious,
you know, it's waiting,
watching the clock tick down,
and there are these slower,
what we call oscillatory,
meaning up and down repeatedly,
slower oscillatory events
related to day length that
are influencing our hormones
like melatonin,
testosterone, and estrogen,
and therefore our mood, our
outlook, and even our behavior.
The next level of time or
bin of time, as we say,
that we are all entrained or matched to
is the so-called circadian time cycle,
which is 24-hour rhythm.
This is perhaps the most powerful rhythm
that we all contain and that
none of us can escape from.
We all have this circadian clock
that resides over the roof of our mouth.
The cells in that circadian clock fire,
meaning they release chemicals
into our brain and body
on a very regular rhythm.
So across the 24-hour cycle,
they will be very active at some periods
and less active at others.
Not surprisingly, there are
periods of every 24-hour cycle
when we are very active
and we tend to be alert
and others when we are asleep.
Now, I've talked a lot
about circadian rhythms
and sleep on this podcast previously
and so I don't want to repeat
too much of that information
in detail, but I'm just
going to give a summary
of how circadian entrainment works
because I haven't really covered that
in the context of time perception.
We have the circadian
clock. It oscillates.
It goes up and down once every
24 hours and then repeats.
Every cell of our body
has a 24-hour oscillation
in the expression of various genes.
How that works is actually really simple,
elegant, and interesting.
DNA, genes, make RNA. RNA
is converted into proteins.
Every cell in our body has
this beautiful 24-hour timer
where a gene is expressed.
And the important thing to
understand about a given gene
in this context is that
that gene is inhibited,
meaning it's reduced,
by a particular protein,
by a little biological
molecule in that cell.
So the gene gets expressed
when there's very little
of that other molecule around.
DNA then becomes RNA.
RNA is translated into a protein
and that protein goes way, way
up and the gene shuts down.
But as that protein gets used up
and its levels eventually
drop low, low, low, low, low
to zero, the gene cycle kicks in again
and the gene gets expressed.
The RNA gets expressed
in the protein again.
This all happens on a 24-hour cycle.
So it's a little built-in timer
in each and every one of our cells.
And I didn't list off the genes,
but for the aficionados out there,
they go by names like
PER for period, BMAL,
CLOCK, and all these different things.
We call them the clock genes
and those clock genes regulate
a number of different functions.
So every cell in our
body has a 24-hour cycle
of gene and protein expression
and the Earth rotates once every 24 hours
and the processes that are happening
in every cell of our body are linked.
They are entrained, as we say,
to the outside light-dark cycle
because morning sunlight,
evening sunlight,
and the lack of light in
the middle of the night
make sure that the changes,
these oscillations that are occurring
within the cells of our
brain and body are matched
to the outside light-dark cycle.
Don't want to go into all the
details of how that happens
but there's some very simple
tools that one can use
to ensure that your entrainment,
your circadian entrainment, is precise.
And I cannot emphasize
enough how important it is
that your circadian
entrainment be precise, why?
Because disruptions in
circadian entrainment
cause huge health problems.
They increase cancer risk.
They increase obesity.
They increase mental health issues.
They decrease wound healing.
They decrease physical
and mental performance.
They disrupt hormones.
You want your cells to be
linked to the circadian cycle
that's outside you and the
circadian cycle outside you
mainly consists of when there's sunlight
and when there is not.
And that's why the simple protocols
to fall out of this whole discussion
about circadian entrainment
are the following.
View 10 to 30 minutes of bright light,
ideally sunlight, within an hour of waking
assuming that you're waking
early in the day especially.
You wake up early in the day,
get outside, see sunlight.
Do that again in the
afternoon or around evening,
10 to 30 minutes, depending
on how bright it is outside.
Artificial lights throughout the day,
or if you want to be awake
and you wake up early
and there's no sunlight outside,
you can of course turn
on artificial lights
if you want to be awake
but basically you want
as much bright light,
ideally from sunlight,
coming in through your
eyes throughout the day.
And then in the evening,
you want as little bright light
coming in through your eyes.
I've said this over and over
and over again on this podcast.
There's always a lot of negotiations,
but I want to make a few things clear.
Try not to wear sunglasses
if you can do it safely.
Fine to wear eye glasses or contacts.
That's not going be a problem.
The light viewing that you
do and the avoidance of light
at night set the fundamental
layer of your time perception.
One of the best ways to
disrupt your perception of time
in the ways that we're going to talk about
in the subsequent portions of the podcast
is to disrupt your circadian clock
and that is not a good thing
for a number of different reasons.
There are other ways
to so-called entrain your circadian clock.
One of the best ways
to do that is to engage
in physical activity at
fairly regular times of day.
You don't have to do it every day
but if you're going to exercise,
try and exercise at a fairly
consistent time of day.
Probably better to exercise
than to not exercise,
even if you have to move that time of day,
but light activity and,
we'll talk about the third
in a minute, food, are the major ways
that you entrain your
internal perception of time
to the external events of the world,
meaning the turning of the Earth
and therefore the exposure
to sunlight or not.
So in addition to sunlight
viewing in the morning
and throughout the day
and avoiding bright light
at night of any kind, not just blue light,
trying to get your activity,
your exercise at fairly regular,
within plus or minus two hours,
from each day to the next
is going to have a very positive effect
on so-called circadian entrainment,
and also eating at fairly regular times.
However, this is exciting.
The data mainly point to the
fact that you need to eat
within more or less the
same time window each day,
not that you always need to eat your meals
at exactly the same time.
So you don't necessarily
have to eat lunch at noon
and a snack at four and dinner at eight
in order to keep your
circadian entrainment
aligned or sharp.
You could for instance
have a small snack at noon
and then eat at two and
then have dinner at six
and then a small snack at eight.
It doesn't so much matter
when the exact meals fall
so much as that they fall more or less
within a consistent period or
phase of each 24-hour cycle.
What happens when this circadian clock
starts getting disrupted?
I mean, this is after all an
episode about time perception.
It's not an episode about
circadian rhythms and entrainment.
Well, there's a classic
study by Aschoff done in 1985
that's now been repeated many times
where they had people go into environments
where they didn't have clocks
and they didn't have windows
and they didn't have watches
and they were sometimes
even in constant dark
or constant light, and they evaluated
how well people perceive
the passage of time
on shorter timescales
and what they found
was really interesting.
What they found is that
people underestimate
how long they were in these
isolated environments.
So after 42 days or so, they'd ask people
how long do you think you've been in here?
And people would say 28 days or 36 days.
They generally underestimated
how long they had been
in this very odd
environment with no clocks
or watches or exposure to sunlight
or regular rhythms of artificial light.
In addition, they found
that their perception
of shorter time intervals
was also really disrupted.
So if they ask them to
measure off two minutes,
normally people are pretty good
at measuring off two minutes.
People come within, you know,
5 to 15 seconds at most.
If you'd kind of have to
sit there and just wait,
you have a pretty good idea
of when two minutes is up.
You say two minutes is up.
Well, when people's circadian clocks
or circadian entrainment, I
should say, was disrupted,
their perception of time
measurement on shorter timescales
of minutes or even seconds
was greatly disrupted.
And as we'll see in a couple of minutes,
that actually causes great problems
for how you contend with work,
how you contend with
challenges of different kinds.
You want your circadian
entrainment to be pretty locked in
or pretty entrained to the
outside light-dark cycle
so that your perception of time
on shorter time intervals can be precise
because the ability to
perceive time accurately
for the given task or given thing
that you're involved in turns out
to be one of the most
fundamental ways that predicts
how well or poorly you
perform that thing or task.
So we've talked about
circannual entrainment,
the matching of the cells and
tissues and organs of our body
to the 365-day journey
that the Earth takes
around the sun each year
and we talked about circadian entrainment,
the way that the 24-hour
genetic and protein clocks
of each and every one
of our cells is matched
to the rotation of the Earth on its axis
and the exposure or lack
of exposure to the sun
because of that rotation on its axis.
Next I'd like to talk about
so-called ultradian entrainment.
Ultradian rhythms are rhythms
of about 90 minutes or so
and all of our existence is broken up
into these 90-minute ultradian cycles.
When you go to sleep at night,
whether or not you sleep
six hours or four hours
or eight hours or 10 hours,
that entire period of sleep is broken up
into these 90-minute ultradian cycles.
Early in the night, you tend
to have more slow-wave sleep.
Later in the night, you
tend to have more REM sleep.
But nonetheless, your sleep is broken up
into these 90-minute cycles.
However, when you wake up in the morning,
many of the things that
you do are governed
by these ultradian rhythms.
For instance, if you were to work,
meaning do math or try
and learn a language
or do physical work of
any kind or work out,
the 90-minute time block
seems to be the one
in which the brain can
enter a state of focus
and alertness and do hard
work and focus, focus, focus
and then at about 90 minutes,
there's a significant drop
in your ability to engage in
this mental or physical work.
Now, everybody from, you
know, the self-help literature
to the business literature to
the pop psychology literature
has tried to leverage
these ultradian cycles
by saying if you're going
to do something hard
and you want to focus on it,
limit it to 90 minutes or less.
And I am one of those people
who's also joined that conversation
and indeed I use 90-minute work cycles,
and I think they are extremely powerful.
One should never expect
that you're going to drop immediately
into a state of high
focus at the beginning
and then remain there for 90 minutes.
We all struggle to varying
degrees to achieve focus
and motivation and drive
within those 90-minute cycles.
But it is true, meaning
there is ample literature
to support the idea that
after about 90 minutes,
we tend to go into a state
of less ability to focus.
So while this isn't
time perception per se,
it is again an example of entrainment.
What are we entraining to, right?
Just because we can focus for 90 minutes
and then not so well at
100 minutes or 120 minutes,
what are we entraining to?
Well, what you're
entraining to is the release
of particular neurochemicals,
in this case, acetylcholine and dopamine
that allow your brain to focus
for particular periods of
time, 90 minutes or so,
and after about 90 minutes or so,
the amount of those chemicals
that can be released
tends to drop very low,
which is why your ability
to focus becomes diminished.
If one would like to explore
more about the kind of backbone
and basis of these ultradian rhythms,
it goes by a different name.
This was originally called
the basic rest-activity cycle.
This was proposed many years
ago by Nathaniel Kleitman.
It was established to be true
within sleep states as I mentioned before.
Then it was debated for a long time
whether or not these
90-minute cycles also control
our ability to focus and
perform work in wakeful states
and it turns out that they do.
Now there's a lot of
literature to support that.
I always get the question how do you know
when the 90 minute cycle begins?
In other words, let's
say you wake up at 8 AM
and you just finished a
90-minute sleep cycle.
Does that mean that your
next 90-minute cycle
where you could do work
begins right at 8:01?
No, the interesting thing
about these basic rest-activity cycles,
these ultradian rhythms,
is that you can initiate
them whenever you want.
This is not like a circadian rhythm
which is a hardwired
unerring signal of 24 hours.
The ultradian rhythms that occur
during sleep are hardwired, unerring.
You don't get the option
of making your sleep cycles
120 minutes or five minutes.
You don't get that option.
But if you decide that you
want to apply ultradian rhythms
to work and performance,
you can set a clock
and decide, okay, now the focus begins.
Now the work begins and this
90-minute cycle is the period
in which I'm going to do work.
And I actually do this, you know,
mid morning and sometimes twice a day,
I do a 90-minute cycle where
I limit all distraction
as much as possible, put away my phone,
often turn off the internet as well.
I talked about this in an episode
on kind of an optimal
workday, at least for me,
just to give an example
of how this might work.
But I want to emphasize again
that these ultradian rhythms
are ones that you set.
So you decide I'm going
to work for 90 minutes.
What you can't negotiate, however,
is that at about 100
minutes or 120 minutes,
no matter who you are,
you're going to see a
diminishment in performance.
You're not going to focus as well.
And that's again because of the way
that these 90-minute cycles
are linked to the ability
of the neurons that release
acetylcholine and dopamine
and to some extent norepinephrine,
the things that give us narrow focus,
motivation, and drive, the way
that these 90-minute cycles
are involved in those circuits.
After about 90 minutes,
those circuits are far
less willing to engage
and therefore it's much harder to continue
to focus to a high degree.
Some people like to do
multiple 90-minute cycles
per day of focus.
In that case, you need
to separate them out.
You can't do one 90-minute cycle,
then go right into
another 90-minute cycle,
then another 90-minutes cycle.
You can't cheat these circuits
related to acetylcholine
and dopamine and
norepinephrine unfortunately.
I suggest that people
do no more than three
and ideally it would be two
or just one of these 90-minute cycles.
Why did I say ideally?
Well, they are very taxing.
You are in a very narrow tunnel of focus.
So for me, I can do one mid morning.
I can probably do another
one in the afternoon.
This is not the kind of work
that's like checking email
or text messaging or social media.
This is very focused hard work,
working on hard problems of various kinds,
and this will be different for everybody.
So I recommend that they be spaced
by at least two to four hours
and most people probably won't be able
to handle more than two per day.
There are probably some mutants out there
that could do three or four,
but that's exceedingly rare.
I think even one a day is going to feel
like a significant mental investment,
and afterwards you're
going to feel pretty taxed.
So now we've talked about circannual,
circadian, and ultradian rhythms,
but we haven't really talked
about time perception per se.
We've mainly talked
about the subconscious
slow oscillatory ways
in which we are entrained
or matched to the year
or to the day and these ultradian cycles
that we can impose on our work
and that we can leverage
toward more focus if we like.
But what about the actual
perception of time?
What actually controls how fast
or how slowly we perceive time going by?
There are basically three
forms of time perception
that we should all be aware of.
One is our perception of the
passage of time in the present,
how quickly or slowly things
seem to be happening for us.
This is kind of like an
interval timer ticking off time.
Tick, tick, tick, tick, tick, tick.
It's either fine-slicing like that,
or tick, tick, tick.
We have interval timers.
I'll discuss the basis
of those interval timers.
We also engage in what's
called prospective timing
which is like a stopwatch
measuring off things
as they go forward.
That might sound a little bit
like what I just described
but it's actually a little bit different.
For instance, if I told
you to start measuring off
a two-minute time
interval into the future,
you could do that pretty well.
But if I told you you had to measure
a five-minute time
interval into the future
and you couldn't use any clocks or watches
or your phone or anything like that,
you would have to set the tick marks.
You'd have to decide how many
times you were going to count off
during that five-minute time block.
There's also retrospective time
which is how you measure
off time in the past.
So if I say, you know, last week,
I know you went to the park,
you did some things
with friends, you know,
you went out in the evening.
How long was it between lunch
and when you went to dinner with friends?
You'd probably think, okay, well,
I remember I went to dinner at seven
and we had lunch right around two.
You're using memory to
reconstruct certain sets of events
in the past and get a sense
of their relative positioning
within time, okay?
So we have retrospective,
current time interval measurements,
and then prospective time
measurement into the future.
The beauty of time perception
in the human nervous system
is that it boils down to a
couple of simple molecules
that govern whether or not
we are fine-slicing time
or whether or not we are
batching time in larger bins.
Those molecules go by names
that maybe you've heard,
things like dopamine and norepinephrine,
neuromodulators, called neuromodulators
because they modulate, they change the way
that other neural circuits work.
Also things like serotonin.
Serotonin is released
from a different site
in the brain than
dopamine or epinephrin is
and has a different
effect on time perception.
So just to give you an example
of how things like dopamine
and serotonin can modulate
our perception of time,
want to focus on a
little bit of literature
that now has been done
fortunately in animals and humans
and which essentially shows
that the more dopamine
that's released into our brain,
the more we tend to
overestimate the amount of time
that has just passed.
Let me repeat that.
The more dopamine that is
released into our brain,
the more we tend to overestimate
how much time has passed.
These experiments are very
straight, straightforward,
excuse me, and they're very
objective, which is really nice,
which is you can give
people or an animal a drug
that increases the amount of dopamine
and then ask them to measure off
without any measurement
device like a watch or a clock
when one minute has passed.
As dopamine levels rise in the brain,
people tend to think that the
minute is up before a minute.
So they, at the 38-second
mark, they'll say,
okay, I think a minute is up.
So they've overestimated how
much time has passed, okay?
The higher the level of dopamine,
the more people tend to overestimate.
Now, it's also true that norepinephrine,
also called noradrenaline, plays a role
and its role is very
similar to that of dopamine
and that's because norepinephrine
and dopamine are close cousins,
as some of you may recall
that they are actually manufactured
from one another, okay?
So dopamine can actually make epinephrin
and norepinephrine biochemically.
There's a cascade in
which dopamine can be made
into norepinephrine and
epinephrin, which is remarkable.
How does having elevated
levels of dopamine
and norepinephrine cause
one to overestimate
how much time has passed?
Well, it does it because of the way
that it causes fine-slicing
of your time bins.
So fine-slicing of time bins
is like increasing the frame
rate on your camera, right?
Slow motion is achieved in movies
and elsewhere by
increasing the frame rate.
So if you take a movie at 30
frames per second and watch it,
it will appear to have
a certain speed, right?
'Cause those are just
snapshots, 30 frames per second.
In contrast, if you took that same movie
at 4,000 frames per second,
you are fine-slicing
and you're going to
see every little detail
and as you play each one of those frames,
it's going to look like
it moved slower, okay?
Whatever, so the kind of
jump shot in basketball
that's done slowly, any slow motion
is the consequence of higher frame rate.
So dopamine and norepinephrine
increase frame rate,
and as a consequence, they tend to lead us
to overestimate the amount
of time that's passed.
Conversely, the neuromodulator
serotonin causes people
to underestimate the amount
of time that's passed.
So they've done these experiments.
They actually have done
these experiments using,
in humans, with drugs
that increase serotonin.
They've also done them with cannabis
which increases serotonin
among other things
including the cannabinoid
receptor activation.
And when people have
elevated levels of 5-HT
or whether or not they've
ingested cannabis,
they tend to underestimate
how much time has passed.
You do the equivalent experiment.
You tell people that they have to guess
or tell you when five minutes,
for instance, has passed.
Just use five minutes
as an example this time.
And generally they will
miss the five-minute mark.
They will think, they'll
let six minutes pass
and they'll think it was five minutes
when they've underestimated
how much time has passed.
And that's because serotonin
and some of the related
molecules in the brain
tend to lead to slower frame rates, right?
They take the frame rate in
the example I used before
from 4,000 frames per second down
to, say, 20 frames per second.
So this is very interesting.
It's interesting in terms of
how pharmacology can be used
to adjust time perception
but it's also interesting
in the context of that circadian rhythm.
There's some emerging evidence
that throughout the 24-hour cycle,
there are robust changes
in the amount of dopamine,
norepinephrine, and
serotonin that are present
in the brain and bloodstream and body
depending on time of day
within the circadian cycle.
Now, I'm not talking about during sleep.
During sleep, there are
definitely variations
in things like dopamine,
norepinephrine, and serotonin.
I talked about that in
the episodes on sleep.
Here I'm just talking about
the role of these molecules
in time perception during wakefulness.
So much of the evidence points to the fact
that in the first half of the day,
approximate first half of the day,
dopamine and norepinephrine
are elevated in the brain,
body, and bloodstream much
more than is serotonin
and that in the second half of the day
and in particular towards
evening and nighttime,
serotonin levels are going up.
I think that's fairly
well-established now.
What that means based on
what we just discussed
about the role of dopamine,
norepinephrine, and serotonin
in setting the frame
rate of time perception
is that our perception
of the passage of time
will be very different in
the early part of the day
and in the latter half of the day.
And there's starting to be some evidence
to support this, that early in the day,
people tend to overestimate
how much time has passed
and later in the day,
they tend to underestimate
how much time has passed.
And this is independent of
taking any kind of substance
that would increase or
decrease dopamine or serotonin.
Now, this is important in terms
of how one thinks about
structuring their day,
because I know many people are thinking
about the various tasks
that they need to do
throughout their day.
Many, or I should say
all of the literature,
at least that I can find on productivity
and things of that sort point to the idea
that we should be doing the hardest task,
the thing that we want to do the least
or the most important
task early in the day
as a kind of a psychological
tool for getting it done
and feeling as if we
accomplished something
and I think that's an
excellent protocol, frankly,
but I'm not sure it's
an excellent protocol
because of the way that
we sense accomplishment
or at least it's not only
an excellent protocol
because of the way that
we sense accomplishment.
Another reason to move
something that's very hard
into the early part of the day
is that if indeed the dopaminergic
and noradrenergic circuits
are more active at that time,
we are actually in a
better position cognitively
to parse that hard
problem because of the way
that we are able to fine-slice
our perception of time
and fine-slice all the
perceptual events outside us.
So what I'm really saying
is that early in the day,
you are a much more
high resolution camera,
so to speak, than you
are later in the day.
Now, different types of tasks
and different types of things
require different frame rates
or different ways of perceiving time,
and indeed, this also
lends itself to a tool
whereby for activities that involve
more kind of creative thinking
that aren't as constrained
by particular answers or outcomes
and in which we need to kind
of blend different aspects
of our memory, different
aspects of task utilization,
in other words, for creative
works, for brainstorming,
for things that are a bit
more fluid, so to speak,
the more serotonergic
second half of the day,
and because of the way the
serotonergic second half
of the day lends itself
to our time perception,
may actually be more beneficial
for those sorts of tasks.
And I'll put a reference
to a couple of the studies
that point to this idea
that in these higher dopaminergic states,
we are better at doing
certain sorts of tasks
and in these more serotonergic states,
we're better at doing other sorts of tasks
and how the dopamine tends
to be earlier in the day
and the serotonin later
in the day, so to speak.
These are broad, I'm painting
with broad strokes here,
but I think these lend themselves
to some really excellent tools
because I think we all
understand the value
of doing something that's hard
or challenging early in the day,
but we should ask ourselves
hard or challenging how?
What does that task
actually really require
in terms of time perception?
Some people might appreciate some examples
of how this might work.
Basically what I'm saying
is if you are doing work
that involves adhering
to some rigid rules,
so math or a recipe or
execution of musical scales
or physical skills or accounting
or something that requires
a lot of precision
where there's a right and
wrong answer and it's hard,
I would suggest that you do that
in the early part of the
day because of the way
that dopamine and norepinephrine
impact time perception.
You are literally better
at slicing up time,
you are a higher resolution
brain during those times,
and so that's going to lend
itself better to events
and demands that require high resolution,
whereas in the afternoon
in this more what I'm
calling serotonergic state,
that's when you're going to
be better at brainstorming
and creative works where
there's some flexibility
in terms of how you're batching
time and perceiving time
and there isn't so much rigid oversight
of a right or wrong answer.
And as an aside to support what I said
but also to take us back
to this critical role
of the circadian rhythm,
there is a lot of evidence
that when one's sleep is disrupted,
when sleep is either too
short or is fragmented
or is not of high enough
quality for enough days,
one of the first things to happen
is that there is a dysregulation
of these dopaminergic, noradrenergic,
and serotonergic states
throughout the day.
They get kind of mish-mashed up.
It's not that they're a total mess
but they aren't as cleanly defined.
And I think this is one of the reasons why
when we haven't slept well
or we haven't slept enough,
we tend to feel a little off,
like we can't concentrate.
Part of that lack of concentration
is due to other things
but part of that concentration
could be due to the fact
that our sense of the
passage of time is disrupted.
So there seems to be some value in keeping
the dopaminergic noradrenergic
state kind of limited
to the early part of the day
and this serotonergic
state, as we're calling it,
kind of pushed towards the
second half of the day.
Now, there is a version of how
dopamine and norepinephrine
can impact our perception
of the passage of time
in ways that can be very
disruptive or even maladaptive
and the best example that
I'm aware of is trauma.
Many people who have been in car accidents
or who have experienced some
other form of major trauma
do what's called overclocking.
Overclocking is when levels
of dopamine and norepinephrine
increase so much during
a particular event,
our level of alertness
is increased so much
during a given event that we fine-slice.
In other words, the frame
rate is increased so much so
that we perceive things as
happening in ultra slow motion.
Now, that might not seem
like a bad thing overall
but the problem with
overclocking is the way
in which that information
gets stamped down
into the memory system.
So the memory system, which
involves areas of the brain
like the hippocampus
but also the neocortex,
is basically a space-time recorder.
What do I mean by space-time recorder?
Well, your nervous system, of course,
is housed in the darkness of your skull.
It doesn't have a whole lot of information
about the outside world
except light coming in
through the eyes and whatever
happens to hit our ears
in terms of sound waves
and skin and so forth
so it has to take all those neural signals
and it has to create a
record of what happened.
Now, it doesn't create a record
of everything that happened
but car accidents and trauma
and things of that sort
oftentimes are stamped down
into our record of what happened.
And what gets stamped down,
what we actually mean by
the phrase stamped down
is that the precise firing
of the sequence of neurons
that reflected some events,
so let's say I'm in a car accident,
certain neurons are firing
because of the flipping
of the car or their
screams or there's blood,
or, you know, things of that sort,
all of that neural activity gets repeated
in the hippocampus and then the sequence
of the firing of those
neurons is also remembered.
So it's not just that
neuron one, two, three, four
fired in that sequence.
It's also that neuron
one, two, three, four
fired at a particular rate.
So it would be one, two, three, four
during the actual event and
then the memory is stored
as firing of those neurons as
one, two, three, four, right?
If during the event, it
was one, two, three, four
at that rate, the storage of the memory
is not going to be one,
two, three, four, okay?
In other words, there's both
a space code, as we say,
meaning the particular neurons
that fire is important,
and there's a rate code, how
quickly those neurons fire
or the relative firing,
the timing of the firing
of those neurons is
also part of the memory.
This affords our memory
system tremendous flexibility.
What it means is that you can
take the same set of neurons
in the hippocampus and stamp
down many, many more memories
because all you have to do is use a match
of the different rates
of the different neurons
that were firing in order
to set that code, right?
Otherwise, if you needed
a different set of neurons
for every memory, you'd need
an enormous hippocampus.
You'd need an enormous head.
So I think you get the basic idea.
Overclocking is a case in
which the frame rate is so high
that a memory gets stamped down
and people have a very hard
time shaking that memory
and the emotions associated
with that memory.
And it's not the topic
of today's conversation
but we will cover trauma in
a future episode in detail,
but many of the treatments for trauma,
EMDR, nowadays there's
a lot of excitement also
about ketamine therapies,
exposure therapies,
you know, like cognitive
behavioral therapies
involve not just trying to
reduce the amount of emotion
associated with a memory, but
also a deliberate speeding up
or slowing down of that memory.
In other words, trying to allow the person
who experienced the trauma to take control
of the rate of the
experience in their memory,
not just whether or not
the memory happened at all.
In fact, you know, one of the first things
that trauma victims learn
is that they aren't going
to forget what happened.
What's eventually going to happen ideally
with good treatment is
that the emotional weight
of the experience will
eventually be divorced
from the memory of the experience.
And that's done again by trying to reduce
the amount of emotional activation
during the recall of that experience
and one of the best ways to do that
is to alter the rate
of the memory playback.
In other words, taking
that firing of neurons
that might've been one, two, three, four,
again, it would be much more complicated,
but one, two, three,
four for the car crash
and getting the memory
to play back at a rate
of one, two, three, four,
or even one, two, three, four,
one, two, three, four.
In other words, allowing the person
or instructing the person to take control
of the rate of the
playback, and in that way,
there seems to be still
yet unknown mechanism
by which people can uncouple
some of the emotional weight
that's associated with that memory.
So overclocking is a
kind of extreme example
of where the dopaminergic
and the neurogenetic system
is ramped up so high
that people have this,
unfortunately, what
seems like indelible mark
in their brain of a particular event.
But again, trauma treatment is designed
to uncouple the emotional
load of that event.
Some of you are probably saying
why dopamine during trauma?
I thought dopamine was
the feel-good molecule.
Well, in reality,
dopamine is not necessarily
a molecule of reward.
It's a molecule of motivation,
pursuit, and drive.
And because of the close relationship
between dopamine and norepinephrine,
oftentimes they are co-released.
So whether or not dopamine is
released during car crashes
or other forms of trauma, we don't know
but what we do know is that
both the dopamine system
and noradrenergic system,
when we say noradrenergic,
we mean norepinephrine, those
systems are greatly increased
anytime there's a
heightened state of arousal.
And arousal can have negative valence,
like meaning associated with
an event that we really hate,
that we would prefer
not to be involved in,
or can positive valence, but
dopamine and norepinephrine
are kind of the common hallmark
of all things of elevated arousal.
And so that's why we see
evidence for dopamine
being associated with these
changes in time perception
both for positive events
and for negative events.
There's a very interesting
relationship between arousal,
dopamine, time perception, and blinking,
and this is all supported by
a really interesting paper,
first author, Terhune is the
last name, T-E-R-H-U-N-E.
It's published in "Current Biology."
Cell Press journal. Excellent journal.
The title of the paper is
"Time Dilates After Spontaneous Blinking."
So heightened states of
arousal are associated
with heightened levels of dopamine.
You now know that dopamine leads
to a kind of fine-slicing of time
and one of the ways that we
fine-slice time is by blinking.
You know, we think of
blinking as just a thing
to lubricate our eyes or to limit
the amount of light coming into our eyes,
but it's a shutter on our experience.
So much of the information
coming into the brain
through our eyes impacts our attention.
I've said it before on this podcast,
that cognitive attention
follows visual attention,
at least for sighted individuals.
Well, it turns out that dopamine
and increases in dopamine are associated
with increases in spontaneous blink rate.
So the more aroused we
are, the more awake we are,
there are a number of effects.
Pupils dilate, heart rate
increases, et cetera,
but also blink rate increases.
And every time we blink,
this study cleanly shows,
we shift our perception
of time, leading to,
as I mentioned before,
overestimations of time.
So it seems as though in some way,
blink rate is actually
related to frame rate.
So this is very, very interesting
and the way that you could
think about leveraging this
would be if you wanted
to actually slow down
your perception of time,
you would blink less.
And if you want to speed
up your perception of time,
you would blink more.
Now, you'd have to think of a scenario
in which that would be useful to you.
Obviously if you're going to blink,
you're going to miss things as well.
But I think it's a very
interesting parameter
of our visual attention as it
relates to time perception,
because what it really speaks to
is that these
neuromodulators like dopamine
or serotonin that adjust frame rate,
they're not doing it through
some magical mechanism.
In fact, there's no single brain area
that we can say controls time perception.
I haven't said today, oh,
you know, it's the striatum.
Well, it involves the striatum
but I'm not going to say,
for instance, oh, it's the cerebellum.
The cerebellum is definitely involved
in timing of movement,
something for a future podcast,
but time perception is what we call
a distributed phenomenon.
It's a network of areas in
the brain working together.
But dopamine and the way that it relates
to the shuttering of your eyes
seems to be controlling the
frame rate on your experience.
Numerous times on this podcast,
I've talked about cold exposure
and nowadays there's a lot of interest
in things like cold showers, ice baths,
immersion in cold water tanks
and lakes and oceans
and things of that sort.
There are a lot of
different positive effects
of cold exposure provided
it's done properly.
It can lead to increases in
metabolism, brown fat stores,
which are the good fat
stores that you want.
They're sort of like a furnace
that allow you to heat yourself up,
stay warm in cold environments,
to reduce inflammation,
to increase resilience and so forth.
There's a study published
in the "European Journal of Physiology"
showing that cold exposure can increase
our baseline levels of
dopamine robustly, 2.5x,
and it's a long-lasting
increase in dopamine
and appears to be a healthy one,
meaning it doesn't seem to be addictive.
I'm sure there are some
people out there addicted
to ice baths, but, you know,
when you think about the range
of dopamine-inducing
behaviors that are addictive,
it seems to be more on
the health-promoting side.
What's interesting is that
because cold water exposure
increases dopamine, it will also change
your perception of time
and if you've ever done
one of these cold water exposures,
you've experienced this.
You've experienced getting
in and feeling like, wow,
making it three minutes is
a really, really long time,
and you are fine-slicing time.
Your frame rate is going up.
Part of that, just at a
kind of a coarse level
is you're thinking, this is painful.
I don't like this. I
want to get out, right?
But part of it is also
that your dopamine levels
are going up very quickly
and therefore your perception
of that discomfort is
also being fine-sliced.
And so you could leverage
a tool, for instance,
where you try and entrain your thinking
to something other than your
immediate experience, right?
This is a kind of a
controversy, if you will,
in the cold exposure world.
The question is do you try
and lean into the experience
and really feel it, or do you
try and distract yourself,
you know, sing a song or count off,
you know, from one to a hundred.
Just know that whatever tactic you use
to get through the cold exposure
that the dopamine level
that's now increased
in your system is going
to cause you to fine-slice
or experience that at slow motion.
So a minute is going to
seem like a lot longer
than a minute in reality.
So you could, for instance,
decide to pay attention
to some external cue.
Maybe it's a metronome that
ticks once every 10 seconds.
You could decide to think
about something else.
You could decide to
sing a song in your head
or sing a song out loud.
All of that will divorce
you from the sensation
that you experience somewhat,
but more so it will divorce you
from the perception of
your experience as governed
by that dopamine increase in frame rate.
If that isn't clear, just know this.
When you're in the ice bath,
your dopamine levels are high.
When your dopamine levels are high,
your experience of the discomfort
of that ice bath is at higher resolution.
Now, up until now, I've been
talking about how dopamine,
and to some extent, serotonin
can differentially impact
your perception of how fast
or how slowly things are
happening in the moment.
But remember, we have prospective time,
we have our experience
of time in the moment,
and we have retrospective time
and there are beautiful
studies that have showed
that the dopaminergic
state changes the way
not just that we experience things now,
but that it changes the way
in which we remember things
in the past and the rate at
which those things occurred.
And those are in opposite direction.
So to make this very simple,
if something that you
experience is fun or varied,
meaning it has a lot of
different components in it
and is, in other words, is associated
with an increase in
dopamine in your brain,
you will experience that
as going by very fast.
Now, this is different than the ice bath
which I just said you experienced
as going by very slowly,
but here I'm talking
about something that's fun
and varied that you really like
and you feel like it
goes by very, very fast.
Imagine an amazing day for
a kid at an amusement park.
They can do a ton of things. It's all new.
They're very excited and they'll feel
like it goes by very fast,
but later they will
remember that experience
as being very long,
that it was a long day
full of many, many events.
And so there's this
paradoxical relationship
between how we perceive
fun, exciting, varied events
in the present and how we
remember them in the past.
For those of you who've gone on vacation,
if you've had an amazing day
on vacation, it'll seem like,
or an amazing vacation overall,
it will seem like it goes by very fast.
The last day of vacation,
you sort of go, whoa,
it went by so fast 'cause
there's so much happening.
But in memory six to eight
months later, you remember, wow,
that just went, you know,
that was a long, long thing.
We had this. Then we had that.
Then we did this. Then we had that.
It tends to spool out in a longer memory
than the actual experience.
Conversely, if you are
bored with something
or it's something you really don't like,
it's going to seem like
it takes a long time
to go through that
experience in the moment,
but retroactively, looking back,
it will seem like that
moment was very short.
So the other day I was
waiting in the waiting room
for the dentist, it was pretty boring.
I was just kind of sitting there.
There wasn't much going on.
And it did seem like it was
going on an awfully long time,
but indeed, looking back,
it just seems like, okay,
I sat in that room, not much happened.
And so it seems like
a very short time bin.
This seems to be an efficiency
of how the brain stores information,
dopamine being associated, of course,
with fun and varied experiences
and low dopamine being associated
with kind of empty, boring,
or what at the time seem
like long experiences.
And this whole thing has been stamped down
into the scientific literature
by those earlier experiments
where they take human
beings and isolate them
in certain environments.
You know, take away all their
clocks and watches and cues
and about what time of day it is
and what time of night it is
and allow people to have a life
where they can either read
and work and do things
or where they have very little to do.
When people are isolated
in very boring environments
and they don't have access
to time cues, time dilates.
They tend to assume that time
has gone on very, very long.
And so the reason I bring this
up is we aren't just driven
by these circadian clocks
and these circannual clocks
and these ultradian clocks.
We are driven by these timers that vary
depending on our level of excitement
and they vary depending
on our level of excitement
because of these neuromodulators,
dopamine and serotonin.
So the way I like to think about it
is that you have two
clocks, two stopwatches.
One is a dopaminergic stopwatch
that fine-slices really closely.
It's like, counts off milliseconds
and it's grabbing a movie
of your experience at
very high resolution.
And in the other hand,
you have a stopwatch
that's gathering big time bins,
big ticks along the, you know,
the hand is moving at bigger intervals,
you know, marking off time.
And depending on whether
or not you're excited
or whether or not you're bored,
you're using different stopwatches on time
and therefore you're perceiving
your experience differently.
One very interesting aspect to the way
that neuromodulators like
dopamine and novelty interact
with time perception and memory
is how we perceive our
relationship to places and people.
So really interesting literature showing
that the more novel
experiences we have in a place,
the more we feel we know
that place, obviously,
but the longer we feel we've been there.
So here's the kind of
gedanken or thought experiment
that illustrates what's in the literature.
Let's say I were to move to New York City.
I happen to really like New York City.
I've never lived there, but
let's say I lived there.
I lived in a given apartment for a year
and I would have a number
of different experiences
in this mental experiment.
Let's say I had 100 different
exciting and new experiences.
I would at the end of that
year feel as if I lived there
a certain period of time, one year.
I would actually know
I lived there one year.
If however I lived in
three different places
in New York City and I met
three times as many people
and I had three times as
many novel experiences,
I would actually feel as if
I had been there much longer
than had I only lived in one location.
This is also true for social interactions.
When we move to multiple
or several novel environments
with somebody else,
we tend to feel as if we
know that person much better
and that they know us much better.
Now, of course, we get the
opportunity to interact
with those people in different contexts
and so indeed we do get the
opportunity to see them,
for instance, at the coffee
shop, how they order coffee.
You maybe go to a sports
event, how they act there.
Maybe how they interact with your family.
You're getting a sense of
them in different contexts.
That's certainly playing a role,
but it seems as if the
more novelty you experience
with somebody, not only the
more familiar they are to you,
but the more time you feel
you've spent with them,
even though the total amount of time
can be exactly the same.
And so that's a very interesting aspect
of how our perception of time
and these neuromodulators
and novelty can shape the
way not just that we perceive
a given event in our
world, but how we relate
to a place or relate to a person.
So we've talked a lot about
the different neurochemicals
and how those neurochemicals can influence
our perception of time.
We haven't talked a lot
about the neural circuits
and the various areas of the
brain that underlie this.
I do want to touch on that
by highlighting a really wonderful study.
This was a study published in "Neuron,"
also a Cell Press journal,
excellent journal.
The title of the paper is
"Behavioral, Physiological,
and Neural Signatures of Surprise
During Naturalistic Sports Viewing."
This experiment is really cool.
They did brain imaging on individuals
who are watching basketball games.
These were basketball games
that actually took
place that were recorded
and the subjects watching
these basketball games
in some cases, not all, had some interest
in who would win or lose,
and in some cases, not all,
the subjects in these studies
had some prior knowledge
of which team they thought was better,
which team was likely to
win or not likely to win.
The basic findings of the study
were that they could measure surprise
by the release of dopamine
in two areas of the brain,
part of what are called,
is called, excuse me,
the mesolimbic reward pathway.
So the two areas of the
brain that are important here
are the nucleus accumbens and the VTA,
the ventral tegmental area.
These are areas that release dopamine
as kind of a token of reward
any time something is surprising
or a positive expectation is met, okay?
So if I predict that my
team dribbling down court
is going to score on this drive
and they get the ball in the basket,
a little bit of dopamine is released.
These two brain areas light up
in the functional imaging so-called FSRI,
functional magnetic resonance imaging
that they used in this study.
What's really interesting about this study
is not just that dopamine
was released any time
that something the subject
wanted to see happened, right,
any time they wanted to see
their team score, they scored,
but also during surprise.
So if they thought for instance,
and they would hit a button to predict
that their team was going to
score in this particular drive
and they didn't, well, then
dopamine could also be released
in response to that surprise.
So this speaks again to
dopamine being something
that's important not
just for positive events,
but for unexpected events.
Now, that's all very interesting
and speaks to the fact
that dopamine is a kind of
flexible currency in the brain.
It's doled out, if you will, or released
when something that one
hopes will happen happens
and it's released when there's a surprise,
even if it's a kind of
a negative surprise.
It's not something that the
subject wanted to happen.
But the more interesting thing
is how that relates to time perception.
What they found was
regardless of what caused
the dopamine release, the
frequency of dopamine release
predicted how the subjects
parsed the time bins
of the game they were watching.
What do I mean by that?
Well, when you watch a basketball game
or you watch anything,
children playing or talking
to your spouse or whatever,
you're batching time.
How are you batching time?
Well, you could batch a
meal by the, I don't know,
the appetizer, the main
course, and the dessert,
but it turns out that's
not what you're doing.
You're batching time according
to the frequency of dopamine pulses,
the frequency of dopamine release.
And that's what they saw in this study.
If they evaluated people's perceptions
of the passage of time,
what they found is that that matched
not whether or not the, you know,
it was a particular
time point in the game,
not whether or not their
team was going down court
or running back up court to play defense,
but the dopamine released
served as markers
which would predict the frame rate
of their perception of the experience.
And if that sounds complicated,
what I mean is how often
and when you release
dopamine is actually setting
the frame rate on the entire
perception of everything,
not just for positive
events or negative events.
So what this means is as
you're going through life,
dopamine and the release of
dopamine is saying that's over
and now you're in a new phase of your life
even if it's very short, right?
So if I get up in the morning
and I really need a cup of
coffee, as you probably all know,
I wait 90 minutes to 120 minutes
before I drink my coffee,
but then I get my coffee
and surely there's a dopamine
hit there, I promise you,
I actually am starting to carve up my day
according to dopamine hits.
Consciously or subconsciously,
I'm actually carving up my experience
according to when I'm getting
dopamine throughout my day.
This governance over
our perception of time
that dopamine has points to a very clear,
very actionable, and very powerful tool.
And that is a tool that many
people have talked about before
which are habits.
People have discussed habits
in a variety of contexts
but in the context of dopamine reward
and time perception, what this means
is that placing specific habitual routines
at particular intervals
throughout your day
is a very, not just convenient,
but a very good way to
incorporate the dopamine system
so that you divide your day into a series
of what I would call functional units.
What would this look like?
It would mean waking up and
having one specific habit
that you always engage in that
causes a release of dopamine.
You can say, well, great.
That'll make me feel
good. And I would agree.
Dopamine released generally
makes us feel motivated
But it would have an
additional effect of marking
that time of day as the beginning
of a particular time bin.
Then inserting another habit,
perhaps the beginning of,
I don't know, your breakfast or something,
but recognizing that that's a habit
and being fairly habitual, you
don't have to be, you know,
obsessively precise about the timing,
but that regular sequencing of things
is going to lead not
just to dopamine release
as it relates to reward and
motivation and feeling good,
but it actually becomes the way
in which we carve up our
entire experience of our day.
And this is almost a circular argument.
You could say, well, of course, you know,
I do one thing, then I do the next,
then I do the next, and
that's how I perceive my day.
That's my day. It's my list.
It's my to-do list, et cetera.
But what I'm saying is that
on the basis of this study,
I should mention the first
author, his last name is Antony.
It was Antony et al. It
was published in 2020.
The study on basketball
viewing, what it points to
is that by engaging in specific habits
that we know we can perform well,
we are actually setting
the frame rate on our day.
And so I think there will soon come a time
where human beings are not
just thinking of, okay,
my morning routine and
my afternoon routine,
I think that can be useful, and in fact,
I used or mentioned a structure
of that sort earlier in the episode,
but rather thinking about
what's actually going on
at the level of our biology,
which is that dopamine is marking time.
Habits are a very clear way
in which we can invoke dopamine release
and therefore provide time
markers, and what this means
is that, for instance,
during your morning,
you might insert habit one and habit two
at, say, I don't know, 8 AM and 10 AM,
and in doing that, that marks an epoch,
a little batch of time
in your morning routine
that's distinct from the
second half of your morning.
In other words, habits serve as flankers
or markers for the passage of your day.
Now, if that seems kind of hyper-neurotic
or why would I want to
structure my life like that,
I would say that many people would do well
to structure their life like
that and to utilize habits
not just for the sake of
what you do during the habit,
but because of the fact that
the habits serve as a marker
because of the way they
can evoke dopamine release.
And in doing that, you are
able to segment your day
into a bunch of smaller, if
you want them to be smaller,
or larger functional units.
If anyone wants to experiment with this,
the Huberman Lab Podcast
puts out a newsletter.
It's called the Neural Network Newsletter.
You can sign up for it at hubermanlab.com.
We put it out each month.
You can see the previous newsletters.
There's zero cost. We have
our privacy statement there.
We don't share your email or anything.
And there you'll find the, you know,
12 steps to improving
sleep was the first one.
There's another, the second newsletter
was all about neuroplasticity
and using scientific literature
to improve learning and teaching,
and in the next newsletter
I intend to include an example protocol
of how one could use
habits and the relationship
between habits and dopamine,
dopamine and time perception,
to structure your day
according to performance
of particular types of tasks.
Today we covered a lot
about time perception.
We certainly didn't cover
everything about time perception
but we covered things like entrainment,
the role of dopamine,
habits and various routines
that can adjust your sense of time
for sake of particular goals.
If you're interested in learning
more about time perception,
I'd like to point you to
a really excellent book
called "Your Brain Is a Time Machine:
"The Neuroscience and Physics of Time."
The book was written by
Professor Dr. Dean Buonomano
who's a professor at
UCLA and a world expert
in the neuroscience and physics of time.
I do hope to get Dean on the podcast
in the not too distant future.
If you're learning from and
are enjoying this podcast,
please subscribe to our
podcast channel on YouTube.
It's simply Huberman Lab on YouTube.
And there you can also
leave us suggestions
for future guests and topics
and questions about the podcast episodes
in the comments section on YouTube.
In addition, please
subscribe to our podcast
on Apple and/or Spotify, and on Apple,
you have the opportunity to leave us
up to a five star review.
You can also follow us on Instagram.
On Instagram I do short
neuroscience tutorials
and tools and protocols.
I cover recent papers,
many of which are not
included on the podcast.
We also have a Patreon. It's
patreon.com/andrewhuberman.
And there you can support the podcast
at any level that you like.
Not so much today but on
many previous episodes
of the Huberman Lab Podcast,
we discuss supplements,
and while supplements aren't
necessary for everybody,
many people derive great
benefit from supplements
for sleep, for focus, and so forth.
One issue with supplements,
however, is that what's listed
on the bottle of various supplements
isn't always what's included in the bottle
and the quality of ingredients
varies tremendously
across different supplement manufacturers.
For that reason, we've
partnered with Thorne,
that's T-H-O-R-N-E,
because Thorne supplements
have the highest levels
of stringency of any
supplement company out there
that we are aware of.
They work with all the major sports teams.
They work with the Mayo Clinic.
And so we're delighted that
we partnered with them.
If you'd like to see the
supplements that I take,
you can go to Thorne,
that's T-H-O-R-N-E, .com
slash the letter U slash Huberman
to see the supplements that I take
and you can get 20% off
any of those supplements.
If you enter the Thorne
site through that portal,
you can also get 20% off
any of the supplements
that Thorne makes.
Thank you for your time
and attention today,
and last but certainly not least,
thank you for your interest in science.
[bright guitar music]